Okay, let's talk about forms,
one of my favorite topics.
So in the chat on loading, we saw how to
get data from the server to the browser,
but sometimes you need to send
data in the opposite direction.
You need to get data from the browser back
to the server, and that's where the form
element, which is the web platform's
way of submitting data comes into play.
So let's build a little todo app.
We've already got an in memory database
setup in this lips of a database module,
and we're just putting
everything in a map.
Obviously in a real app,
you would use an actual database but
we're not gonna do that for this tutorial.
And we have a load function in
source/routes/page.server.js,
that uses the cookies API to get
ahold of the current user ID,
if the user doesn't yet
have an ID, it assigns one.
It gets the todos that
belong to that user.
So this allows us to have a per-user
todo list, but we need to add a form so
that we can create new todos.
So go over to src/route/page.svelte,
and below the H1, we're gonna add
a form element With a method of post, cuz
we're gonna post some data to the server.
Inside there, we'll create a label,
Add some text, add a todo,
Then we'll create an input.
Give it a name which is
gonna be description.
And I'm gonna disable
autocomplete as well.
So we can now type into this form and
submit some data, but we get a 405 error
because no actions exist for
this page right now so we can fix that.
What we need to do is create
an action in our page.server.js file.
This is the counterpart
to the load function.
So down here, create an actions object.
And we're gonna create a default action,
Which is gonna be an async function.
That's gonna grab the cookies and
the request object.
And first of all,
is gonna grab the description from
that input by requesting the form data
And getting the description.
And it's gonna create it todo in the mat
that belongs to the current user.
So db.createTodo(cookies.get(userid)
data.get Description.
Okay, this request object here,
this is a standard request interface
that is part of the web platform.
You can learn about the request
object on MDN if you're not familiar,
it's something that you'll
use a lot in web development.
And SvelteKit uses standard
web APIs as far as it can.
When we call await request.formData, that
returns an instance of the FormData API,
which is the same object that you get in
the browser if you call new FormData,
and then pass in a form element.
So now if we type in some data,
And hit Enter,
post it to the server, you'll see that
it reloads the page with the new data.
And you'll notice that we haven't
had to add any fetch code,
we haven't had to do error handling and
stuff like that.
Data updates automatically.
And because we're using a form element,
this app would continue to work
even if JavaScript was disabled.
And we can actually demonstrate that
by opening this app in a new tab.
I'm gonna open the settings.
Scroll down to Disable JavaScript,
reload the page.
Hit Enter, and the page reloads even
though we're not using JavaScript, we
see up to date personalized data and close
that window now get back to the tutorial.
So just now we use a default action but
in practice,
a page that only has a single
action is actually quite rare.
Most of the time you will need to
have multiple actions on a page.
So in the case of our todo app,
we wanna be able to delete todos
once we've completed them.
First thing we're gonna do is get
rid of the default action and
turn it into a named action,
call it create.
And then we'll create a new one,
let's call it delete.
And it's gonna be the same deal.
It's an async function,
uses cookies and request.
We're gonna get the data, And
we're gonna delete the todo.
This time the data that we're gonna
get from the form is an ID property.
Now the first thing we wanna do before we
implement the delete action inside our
page is we need to update the form
action that creates the todo.
So go back to page.svelte,
scroll up to the form, and
we're gonna add an action attribute.
By default, the action is
the same as the current page.
And so if you just have form method
equals post without specifying an action,
that is gonna call the default action
on the page that you're currently on.
But in this case,
we wanna use a named action.
We'll do that by adding a query
parameter with a value of
create with a slash in front of it.
So what this means is we take the current
URL and we append a query string
with a parameter whose name is /create and
which doesn't have a value.
And that tells SvelteKit that we're trying
to invoke the create action on this page.
Now the action doesn't have to be on this
page, you can actually have an action that
points to a different page entirely, which
is very useful when you're building things
like login and logout forms that
should exist on all pages of your app.
Okay, so lastly, we wanna create a form
for each of the todos in our list.
So inside here,
instead of just having that description,
lead form method = POST,
Invoke the delete action.
And you'll recall that inside the action,
we were referring to an ID property
that we need to make available.
So each todo has an ID already.
And to add that to the form
without showing it to the user,
because the user doesn't want
a random string of digits,
we'll do input type = hidden,
give it a name of id so
that we can get it with form.getid, and
the value is gonna be todo.id.
Let a span containing
the todo description.
And then we're gonna add
a button with a label So
that people who can't see
the icon that is about to appear
can also understand what
this button is going to do.
Okay, you'll see that we have these
little trash can icons down here
that's coming from the remove.svg which is
being controlled down here with some CSS.
So if we've wired everything up correctly,
then we should now be able to
delete todos as well as add them.
And indeed it works.
And so if we refresh the page,
we'll see that those todos stay deleted.